Title: Waking The Dragon
Date: 2005-06-13
Modified: 2012-09-15
Slug: waking-the-dragon

<blockquote>Phoenix Festival 2005
Waking The Dragon
July 21 - July 25 
Klickitat County, Wa
www.phoenixfest.com
(Feel free to spread this on to your loved ones and anyone who may be
interested)

Tickets: www.phoenixfest.com/tickets.html

Hello Kids, here again with another Phoenix Festival Announcement!

At this point we pretty much have all of the nuts and bolts in line for the
fest and things are looking quite amazing... 

MUSIC:
We are all quite thrilled about the diversity of the performances lined up
this year. Most of you have likely heard about the national and
international acts; Eat Static, Cosmosis, Tipper, Chris Carter and Nick
Taylor. Without a doubt with these folks present, the stages are going to
erupt on a nightly basis. 

However, that is not all. The local representation this year is
unparalleled, never in the festival's 5 year history has there been so much
Northwest diversity and skill gracing the various stages. Some of the live
acts and DJs you can expect to see are: KJ Sawka, Reggie Watts & all his
homies, Surrounded By Ninjas, Solovox, Auditory Sculpture, Marmalade,
Bumblebee, Variform, Dahlia, AtoMikDoG v.S. novaTRON, Miss Solar System,
Holy Sons, King David, Grails, pr0teus, Specs One, Synth Club, Mandii, Try
My Cabbage, Jerry Abstract, Muschi, Lara, DJ Advent, Eddie, Osiris and so
many more. The list is phenomenally long and reads like a who's who in the
burgeoning NW music scene. 

To see it for yourself checkout: www.phoenixfest.com/performance.html.

STAGES:
Though we would love to take credit for such a stellar lineup, it really is
the stages who are responsible for putting together such an amazing roster
of talent. Speaking of the stages, each one has its own theme and direction
programmed and dialed in practically to perfection...

The stages are:

COMBUSTION - The Phoenix Festival simply would not be what it is without
proper representation from the NW Psytrance community. The stage this year
is going to take things to new heights, featuring performances from Eat
Static and Cosmosis, this area is going to knock your psychedelic spandex
trousers clean off.

DRAGONTECH INC - The Breaks stage is back! These kids are coming out again
in full force to kill it with the sickest breaks from a keen selection of
locals and a couple of headliners.

UPTOWN - This stage will have a foundation in hip-hop and turntablism. The
music genres will consist of down-tempo, afro-cuban jazz, jungle, IDM, and
two very special laptop specialists.

FREE CASCADIA - Focusing primarily on local Seattle talent, Free Cascadia
will embody the musical equivalent of the political diversity its name
implies. Expect live bands, DJs and Live PAs covering the spectrum from
Techno to Rock, Downtempo to Electro, Hip Hop to IDM and all points in
between.

SPIRALNITE - This stage is being run by an extremely enthusiastic Seattle
based crew, Spiral Nights is going to feature headliners from Seattle and
Portland. Expect a focus on House, Jungle, Live DnB and Techno. These folks
are bridging the gap between the Seattle and Portland Electronic Dance
Communities. 

Of course, the performances at Phoenix Festival are not all about music. If
you've been before we know that you've come to expect far more and this year
is certainly no exception!

99 EYES:
We have invited some very special and bizarre folks to come out this year.
999 EYES ov Endless Dream CARNVIAL SIDESHOW ov thee DAMNED will be running
their cirkus 24 hours a day throughout the duration of the event. Daytime
shows will be very much on the whimsical side, but as the sun sets be
prepared for the darkness to set in. Presented in association with
International Maggott Theatre, Societas Insomnia, KatabatiK
Metacommunications Platform, the Day ov the Zombie, Summon Creature Theatre,
and the Sour Mash Hug band, this will be something you will not soon forget.
Over 100 anarcho-punk style circus performers hailing from troupes across
the united states will converge on the fest for a sweet injection of the
bizarre. 

SATI:
Sticking with tradition, we have asked a group to come out and perform for
you each night at midnight to help get things warmed up. Sati will be
conveying the story of the Phoenix and The Dragon this year. They will be
working in conjunction with several members of the cirkus to blow your minds
with a nightly performance guaranteed to light up the night. 

THEMECAMPS:
And now, we come to another favorite element of the festival -- the theme
camps. A lot of the old favorites are back to serve as faithful distractions
as you wander around the festival. Potluck, ChickenHed, Novatron Lounge,
Camp Cooler and 1derland will be out in full force as well as many many
others. And if you are interested in a themecamp yourself, there is no need
to register, come on out and do your thing -- we welcome you with open arms.
However if you would like to register, we'll list you on on our website.
Just go to the themecamp page here: www.phoenixfest.com/camps.html.</blockquote>


