Title: Void Star is one of my favorite novels of recent years.
Date: 2018-11-26
tags: books, micro

I have at times described it as being as if China Miéville had written a book in the Bridge trilogy, with plot devices contributed by Neal Stephenson. Other times I've just described it as my favorite William Gibson novel this millenium. Both of which I think communicate the tone of the book and the high regard in which I hold it. With [Void Star](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Void_Star), [Zachary Mason](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zachary_Mason) created a sort of ethereal cultural exploration, very Gibsonian in nature, and you won't like it if you're reading it for the plot.

The audiobook is also very good. I say this as someone who dislikes audiobooks. Neither audio books nor podcasts fit into my life, and I can count the number of audiobooks I have ever listened to on two hands. But the actors who perform the three main characters of Void Star -- especially the woman who voices Irena, who I wish would perform [Pattern Recognition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pattern_Recognition_%28novel%29) -- are all perfect in their roles and somehow manage to capture how I imagined the characters when I read the book, which is a thing that I think rarely happens in any adaptation of a book into a different medium. Zachary Mason imbues the prose of his novel with a sort of poetry and rhythm that the actors all capture perfectly. I read the book a second time months after listening to the audiobook and found myself reading it in their voice, emulating their pacing.
