Title: Lawson Kline has been manufacturing high-quality outdoor equipment for about ten years.
Date: 2020-02-02
Tags: micro, gear, quote

He's experimented with a wide range of products, and I've bought most of them. These days he's known mostly for his cordage, which is unique and inovative, but cordage is not a topic I get overly excited about. I do get [excited about stakes](/2010/06/concerning-stakes/) and Lawson's aluminum [Apex Stakes](https://lawsonequipment.com/All-Products/Apex-Tent-Stakes-p1118.html) and [Titanium Shepherd's Hook Stakes](https://lawsonequipment.com/All-Products/Titanium-Tent-Stakes-p883.html) are both probably the best on the planet. The titanium stakes are currently on sale, and he sent a description of how they are made to his newsletter today:

> We cut, bend, and point each tent stake one at a time in our shop. I usually have to buy a very large quantity worth of Titanium, per diameter. And this is practically me begging them to sell to me. The mills I buy from require very large qty's in order to sell to us, as they usually sell to big aerospace companies like Lockheed Martin, Boeing, United Technologies, etc, So it is very expensive to stock a product like our titanium stakes, as it is 100% an aerospace material.
>
> The rods come to the shop in a wooden crate via motor freight. They are usually about 12 feet long. We first start off by using a rod parter to cut the stakes to length to get our blanks. If you have never seen one of these machines before they are very neat. It essentially breaks/shears the rod in a very clean and controlled manner. So they do not have to be saw cut. It's like a sheet metal shear for round rods. Our rod parter will accurately cut rods from 1/16"-5/8". There are two parting disc's used to do all the of the work. They are made from hardened tool steel. So they are cutting like scissors so to speak, but the rod goes through a hole to keep the end round and to reduce the burr as much as possible. There is an adjustable stop on the machine that allows the first rod to be cut as the 10,000th one, with no real measurable difference between any of them. It is a highly precise machine.
>
> Next, they are bent either one, two, or three at a time (depending on the rod diameter) on a custom made bender. This is a bender that I made myself over 10 years ago, and it has probably made 100,000+ tent stakes ever since. Last the stakes are pointed in another machine that I also custom-built. The stake is fixtured into a holder where it advances towards the cutting head and then puts a point on the end using a special end type mill.
>
> There is no machine in the world that you could buy that could make a stake from start to finish, so I had to custom make two of the three machines to make these. This is the reason we are the only manufacturer in the USA making titanium tent stakes. (and probably because I am bad at bean counting...) I do know that it would be far more profitable for me to stock and sell Chinese stakes, but for me, the details matter. And I honestly love making custom machinery that can make products that not many other companies can. BUT as a result, this means I usually have way too many titanium tent stakes in stock as I have to make about a year's supply at one time. Obviously, if I sold more stakes, then this wouldn't be an issue, but since I don't, this is the one product that I have a lot of my working capital tied up into.
