Title: Navigation
Date: 2007-08-18
Modified: 2012-09-15
Tags: survival, triple aught design, navigation, gear, bushcraft
Slug: navigation

One should always carry the knowledge and skill to navigate in your place. Always in my pack is a <a href="http://store.silvacompass.com/products/345156/Ranger_CL__515_Compass">Silva Ranger CL</a> compass -- a light, compact compass, for which I can use to navigate either with the terrain or with a map. The compass is stored in a <a href="http://www.tripleaughtdesign.com/Equipment/Pouches/BC8-Pouch">TAD Gear BC-8</a> pouch, which I picked up on my pilgrimage to <span class="removed_link">TAD</span> while passing through San Francisco earlier this summer. The pouch can be attached to my belt, pack, or any other piece of webbing, assuring the compass always has a place on my person, without taking up precious pocket space.

In the field, I also carry a <a href="https://buy.garmin.com/shop/shop.do?cID=145&pID=326" >Garmin Etrex Vista Cx</a> GPS device. The GPS is unessential and shouldn't be relied upon for primary navigation. Its error is larger than that of a compass; it depends upon a clear line of sight to the sky, making it more of a hassle than a help to use in forested areas; and, of course, it depends upon batteries. I've had one occasion this summer where the GPS insisted that North was South and South was North, implying either a sporadic pole shift or shaky satellite reception. My primary use of the GPS is the trip computer -- the odometor, my moving time, my stopping time, my average speed, and elevation shift. I'll also use it for a quick reading of my coordinates to get a rough idea where I am, and occasionally the Tracks program, which can be used to retrace my steps.

Always carry a map. USGS 7.5" topo maps are the best. On my backcountry trips here in the Park, I carry a minimum of 3 maps: a Tom Harrison Map of the entire Park, a Tom Harrison Map more specific to my location in the Park, and the USGS maps for each quadrangle I plan to walk through. The map I primary reference is the second Tom Harrison, which is clear and easy to read and has mileage printed directly on the trails. The USGS maps I carry for cross-country travel or in case I get lost. The large Tom Harrison map is carried more for a sense of place and planning other trips.

Learn to read a map. I've never had a class in the subject, nor read a book, but I'm confident in my ability to utilize a map. The best way to learn is practice. Here's what to do: buy the USGS 7.5" quadrangle for the area you live in. If you live in an urban area, try to buy a quadrangle for a nearby park or forested area -- someplace that isn't flattened and paved. (But buy the maps for the urban areas too! I have the 7" quadrangles for the city I live in, covering my home and commute, taped on my wall, for exploration and post-Apocalypse survival.) Now take your new map and wander into the woods. Figure out where you are. Find a feature on the map, such as a hill or a ridge, and then find it in your place. How steep are the contours in real life? Here's a hint: contours "V" upstream.

Even if you're unable to triangulate your position or perform other minute calculations, you should have the confidence to read a map and have a rough idea of what that means in real life. A few weeks ago, a visitor came in to the Visitor Center in the Park while I was working. He was interested in a backcountry permit. After glancing at the map, he asked how much water he should bring. I hate giving someone like that a permit. If you're unable to read the steepness of the trail and the locations of water sources, you have no business in the backcountry. And everybody <em>should</em> have business in the backcountry. So learn to read.

Pictures of my gear may be <a href="http://www.flickr.com/photos/pigmonkey/sets/72157603095200992/" >found here</a>.
